---
layout: post
title: gpu fluids simulator
description: >
  Implementation of a Position Based Fluids real-time simulator
  
  **Source code available [here](https://github.com/axoloto/RealTimeParticles).**
sitemap: false
hide_last_modified: false
category : rtp
image: /assets/img/blog/fluids-bg.jpg
accent_image: 
  background: url('/assets/img/blog/fluids-bg.jpg') center/cover
  overlay: false
accent_color: '#ccc'
theme_color: '#ccc'
---

# Position Based Fluids

1. this list will be replaced by the table of contents
{:toc}

## Introduction

To acquire knowledge and expertise in a domain, I tend to mostly rely on two mechanisms:
1. **Aiming high** (sometimes stupidly high)
2. **Splitting complex challenges in smaller ones to tackle them separately**

Following and combining those two basic principles usually works pretty well for me. I set high goals far ahead, partition the path leading to it in a multitude of intermediary steps, and patiently reach everyone of them to finally arrive at the ultimate objective.

Hence the boids behaviour model described in my latest [post](https://axoloto.github.io/rtp/2021-07-11-boids/) was just a step. I greatly enjoyed it but it was first of all a necessary intermediary stage. I had something more complicated in mind, a physics model like fluids or combustion, but I wanted to separate theorical and technical challenges.

Boids project was all about setting up a C++ project from scratch, creating an OpenGL render, an OpenCL wrapper and connecting them altogether. No significant theorical obstacles but a lot of technical difficulties to handle one by one. Real physics models usually come with complex ordinary or partial differential equations (ODE/PDE), adding another mathematical layer of complications. I wanted to have strong foundations before playing with it. 

Well guess what; boids simulation being fully functional, now is the time for the real game: **implementing a real-time 3D fluids simulation**! Let's begin.

## Simulating Fluids with Math and bits

**I always found amazing that such a complicated thing like fluids dynamics can be modelized by a couple of differential equations.** Fluids motions can be incredibly complex, both temporally and spatially, nevertheless some 19<sup>th</sup> century geniuses, namely Claude-Louis Navier and George Gabriel Stokes, brought up a pair of PDEs and showed that by approximately solving them you could get very close from many fluids behaviors present in our world. Crazy, right? I say approximately because the Navier-Stokes equations have no evident solutions in 3D and therefore are solved using numerical or analytical models based on different approximations. **So, before implementing anything, we need to decide which of those approaches suits the best our needs.**

By the way, if you have 3D solutions of Navier-Stokes equations written on your fridge, don't hesitate to share it to the world because it is among the [seven most wanted open problems in mathematics](http://www.claymath.org/millennium-problems/navier%E2%80%93stokes-equation) ($1 million prize).

$$
\begin{aligned}
\nabla \cdot \mathbf{u} &= 0 \\
\rho ( \frac{\partial \mathbf{u}}{\partial t} + \mathbf{u} \cdot \nabla \mathbf{u} ) &= - \nabla p + \rho \mathbf{g} + \mu \nabla^2 \mathbf{u}
\end{aligned}
$$

*Miss Equation 1822, the Navier-Stokes equations (Eulerian description for a viscous incompressible fluid)*

### Eulerian or Lagrangian? To be or not to be?

Before diving into numerical schemes and solvers, first we need to choose between two different ways of looking at fluids motion:
1. **Eulerian description** - **We look at the fluids domain globally, considering it as a vector field.** The fluids behavior is analyzed and solved through time at specific fixed places in the studied domain. This approach is extensively used in the **computer fluids dynamics** (CFD) field where scientists and engineers apply it to analyze and solve real world fluids problems, for example reducing aircraft drag or improving wind turbines efficiency. **This approach can gives very precise estimations of flow motions and forces.** I used it in my master thesis as most of the Fluids Lab I was working at. Unfortunately **it can be extremely costly**, some 3D heavy simulations can literally take weeks or months to proceed. Besides, particles movements can be obtained by post-processing the fluids velocity field but they are not directly considered in the solver.

2. **Lagrangian description** - **We look at the fluids as a group of individual particles, analyzing their interactions to determine their trajectories and conditions.** Contrary to the Eulerian approach, the domain is not considered as a whole and its importance is less significant. Hence, no need of mesh or grid, simply a bunch of particles on which we apply some rules modelizing the fluids interaction. To make it simple, **it is a bit like approximating a fluids domain with a ball pit**. Historically, Lagrangian simulations have been considered less precise than Eulerian ones. One of their biggest forces is their execution speed, they **can be used for coarse but fast and visually acceptable simulations**. Thus, they are particularly apprecieted in the world of **computer graphics**. By being meshfree, it is also well suited for free-surface problems or ones with large boundary displacements.

In short, by using Lagrangian description we can favor interactivity over accuracy. **Hence, a Lagrangian solver clearly sounds as the right candidate for our real-time particle simulator.** We "simply" need to apply the right combinations of rules on each particles to give them a realistic visual sense of fluids motion. This is the topic of the next part.

### Lagrangian computational methods

#### The old venerable master

**Smooth Particles Hydrodynamics (SPH)** is one of the major computational methods used in Computer Graphics for fluids. Initially developped by Gingold, Monaghan and Lucy in 1977 for astronomical problems (article), since then **it has been extensively used in fluids simulations, for its simplicity of implementation and execution**. Combined with some post-processing rendering, it can deliver very realist free-surface interactive simulations.

**SPH method divides the fluid continuum in a set of discrete particles.** For each particle, SPH interpolates its fluids properties using its neighbors and functions quantifying the influence of each of them. Called **smoothing kernel functions**, those functions are a central component of the method. They determine how particles interact with each others and must be carefuly designed. Using this method, we can **compute pressure and viscosity forces on each particle and deduce its acceleration through Newton's second law.** Then, its integration gives us the velocity and finally the position of the particle. To facilitate nearest neighbor search (NNS), SPH method can also use some spatial partioning. Particles, sum of neighbors contributions, spatial partioning... sounds familiar, right? Don't be surprised, **it is strongly similar to the existing implementation used for the boids model and that's very good news.**

\begin{equation}
 A(\mathbf{x}) = \sum_j m_j \frac{A_j}{\rho_j} W(\mathbf{x} - \mathbf{x_j}, h)\end{equation}

*Interpolation of a scalar quantity A at $$\mathbf{x}$$ by a weighted sum of contributions from its neighbor particles $$j$$*

$$
\begin{aligned}
W_{poly6}(\mathbf{r}, h) = \frac{315}{64 \pi h^9} 
      & \left\{
    \begin{array}{lr}
      (h^2 -\Vert r \Vert^2)^3 & 0 \leq r \leq h\\
      0 & otherwise
    \end{array}
    \right.    \\
W_{spiky}(\mathbf{r}, h) = \frac{15}{\pi h^6} & \left\{
     \begin{array}{lr}
      (h - \Vert r \Vert)^3 & 0 \leq r \leq h\\
      0 & otherwise
    \end{array}
    \right. 
\end{aligned}
$$

*Exemple of smoothing kernel functions used in our model and mentioned in [Muller et al., 2001](https://matthias-research.github.io/pages/publications/sca03.pdf)*

Despite its charms, after reading a few papers on SPH, **I realized that it might not be the perfect solution.** **Traditional SPH model can rapidly shows instabilities when some particles have few or no neighbors, injecting negative pressure in the domain.** There is a vast number of variants made in the past decades to address those issues and improve the initial model, PCISPH, XSPH... Modern SPH results are much better, but the **use of small time steps for the simulation is still necessary, limiting simulation speed.** Hence, even if you manage to have a simulation running at 60 fps, the motion of particles might be visually slow.

#### A newcomer in town

While reading a well-known fluids SPH paper called [Particle-Based Fluid Simulation for Interactive Applications](https://matthias-research.github.io/pages/publications/sca03.pdf) written in 2001, one authors name caught my attention: Matthias Muller. He is currently the physics research lead at NVIDIA, and I remembered that I had seen another computational method on his personal page a while ago. 

Called **Position Based Dynamics** (PBD), this framework was presented in 2006 and has been used for fluids simulation in a paper named [**Position Based Fluids**](https://mmacklin.com/pbf_sig_preprint.pdf) (PBF). It was published in 2013 by Muller and Macklin, 12 years after the initial SPH paper. Personal rule of thumb; **when scientists wrote a paper on the same subject 10 years after the previous one, it is usually a good idea to read it**, they have probably something better to propose. This PBF paper brought indeed great insights to this new method but also highlighted the limitations of the SPH model. It also helped me understanding the differenciation between two keywords used in this field: **interactive vs real- time**. The first one means fast enough to play with interactively but potentially still visually too slow to be acceptable in many applications, the latter means interactive and fast enough for video games type application, exactly what we are looking for.

Many computation methods, SPH included, are based on Newton's second law. You compute the forces applied on each particle, use it to obtain its acceleration and from there integrate it twice to get its position. You repeat it for each time step and you have something moving. Position Based Dynamics/Fluids approach is radically different, you don't even compute the acceleration, you mostly focus on **particles position** and **constraints**. Constraints are designed functions defining how you want the system to behave, how you want the particles to be positioned between each other. You can imagine one constraint as a web connecting one particle to its neighbors and constraining them in order to have some physical property (energy, density or else) at its desired value. I find this approach very interesting. No double time integration and more explicit control on your system, as you manipulate directly particle positions. To improve precision and get closer to the wanted behavior, you can iterate on your constraint system at each time step. By doing so, **PBD brings more stability and allows us to increase simulation time steps, bringing us into the real-time world.**

### Position Based Fluids equations

#### Constraint concept
In their [article](https://mmacklin.com/pbf_sig_preprint.pdf), Macklin and Muller give a good overall presentation of their proposed framework. It is quite consequent and contains different specific ramifications and fine-tuning so I won't go into every details. Instead, **I want to focus on the key concept of constraint** because it took me a while to understand it completely and I think its comprehension is vital for any PBF implementation.

For each particle $$ p_i $$, Position Based Fluids approach sets a single positional constraint $$ C_i $$ on $$ p_i $$ itself and its neighbors, all their positions being contained in $$ \mathbf{X} = [\mathbf{x}_1, \ldots, \mathbf{x}_n]$$ with $$ i \in [1, \ldots, n] $$. The objective is to constraint each particle to reach a position $$ \mathbf{x}_i $$ where its density $$ \rho_i $$ tends towards the rest density $$ \rho_0 $$, a fluids-dependent property defined by the user.

$$ C_i(\mathbf{X}) = \frac{\rho_i}{\rho_0} - 1  \tag{1} $$

Interestingly, we rely on a SPH kernel function $$ W $$ to compute $$ \rho_i $$. In the article, they use the smoothing kernels $$ W_{poly6} $$ and $$ W_{spiky} $$ introduced previously.

$$ \rho_i = \sum_{j = 1}^n W_{poly6}(\mathbf{x}_i - \mathbf{x}_j, r) \tag{2} $$

For every constraint, we want to find the set of positions $$ \mathbf{X} $$ which forces the density $$ \rho_i $$ to be equal to $$ \rho_0 $$. Mathematically, it means that we want to find the particles positions correction $$ \Delta \mathbf{X}^i $$ giving us:

$$ C_i(\mathbf{X} + \Delta \mathbf{X}^i) = 0 \tag{3} $$

From there, we can try to minimize the constraint $$ C_i $$ by iterations with a gradient descent. To do so, we linearly approximate $$ (3) $$ and assume that $$ \Delta \mathbf{X}^i $$ is in the direction of the negative gradient of $$ C_i $$. Considering $$ \nabla C_i = \nabla_{\mathbf{X}} C_i = [\nabla_{\mathbf{x}_1} C_i, \ldots, \nabla_{\mathbf{x}_n} C_i]$$ :

$$ \Delta \mathbf{X}^i \approx \nabla C_i(\mathbf{X}) \lambda_i \tag{4} $$

$$
\begin{aligned}
C_i(\mathbf{X} + \Delta\mathbf{X}^i) & \approx C_i(\mathbf{X}) + \nabla C_i(\mathbf{X})^T  \Delta\mathbf{X} = 0  \\
      & \approx C_i(\mathbf{X}) + \nabla C_i(\mathbf{X})^T \nabla C_i(\mathbf{X}) \lambda_i = 0
\end{aligned} \tag{5}
$$

At this point, we can deduce the value of the density constraint coefficient $$ \lambda_i $$ :

$$ \lambda_i = - \frac{C_i(\mathbf{X})}{\sum_{j = 1}^n {\mid \nabla_{\mathbf{x}_j} C_i(\mathbf{X}) \mid}^2 } \tag{6} $$ 

Besides, using the SPH discrete definition of the density $$ (2) $$, we can define more precisely the gradients of $$ C_i $$ with respect to each particle:

$$
\nabla_{\mathbf{x}_k} C_i(\mathbf{X}) = \frac{1}{\rho_0} \left\{ 
    \begin{aligned}
     & \sum_{j = 1}^n \nabla_{\mathbf{x}_i} W_{spiky}(\mathbf{x}_i - \mathbf{x}_j, r), \space k = i \\ 
     & - \nabla_{\mathbf{x}_j} W_{spiky}(\mathbf{x}_i - \mathbf{x}_j, r), \space k = j
\end{aligned} \right. \tag{7}
$$

Remember that **for each particle we set one constraint affecting this particle but also its neighbors.** Hence for one particle, **its position is affected by its own constraint but also the ones set on its neighborhood.** Macklin and Muller superpose each contribution :

$$
\Delta \mathbf{x}_i = \sum_{j = 1}^n \Delta \mathbf{x}^j_i = \sum_{j = 1}^n  \lambda_j \nabla_{\mathbf{x}_i} C_j(\mathbf{X}) \tag{8}
$$

Finally, by connecting $$ (7) $$ and $$ (8) $$ and assuming $$ \nabla_{\mathbf{x}_i} W_{spiky}(\mathbf{x}_i - \mathbf{x}_j, r) = -\nabla_{\mathbf{x}_j} W_{spiky}(\mathbf{x}_i - \mathbf{x}_j, r) $$ ($$W_{spiky}$$ is symmetric), we obtain:

$$
\Delta \mathbf{x}_i = \frac{1}{\rho_0} \sum_{j = 1}^n (\lambda_i + \lambda_j)\nabla_{\mathbf{x}_i} W(\mathbf{x}_i - \mathbf{x}_j)
\tag{9}
$$

That's it, our constraint system is set up. For each particle, we set a constraint, compute its density, from there deduce its lambda and finally obtain the position correction. We can repeat it several times for each time step in order to get closer from the ideal of enforcing constant rest density everywhere in our system.

#### Simulation loop

Now that the concept of constraint and the position correction algorithm have been explicited, we can have a look at the overall simulation loop called for every time step.


Connecting 
 tensile instability, xsph compressibility,  cook recipe. Correction of the position. No negative pressure.
Show algorithm. SPH kernels  spiky grad derivative.

## Implementing a Position Based Fluids models

### Preparing the integration

#### Switch between different physical models

Had in mind different models since the beginning of the app, so I had prepared the ground to switch. Using polymorphism and generic gates to different subsystems. Complexity I didn't plan was about the OpenCL context, singleton, clean kernels and buffers without quitting the app. Cleaning the cl files and rearranging stuff. We will use the NNS grid accelerator for both models.

#### A first model with gravity

First model, using equation of PBD. Always working iteratively towards a goal, guess it is visible now from my previous post. No constraint yet, only first bits of the equation and last ones. Yay! Working, we have an instant rain simulation. Time to dive into the kernels.

### Fight for the first fluid simulation

#### Implementing the fluids kernels

Implementing first the different bricks, the SPH kernels. Then the density constraint. The struggle with the constraint computation and correction.

#### Where are my fluids particles, Varus?
So this is where it becomes fun. Theory, done. Basic implementation done. Dealing with expectation VS reality. I will be honest with you and present how it worked, or not so. And how I made it worked. To have an idea of how devs work in reality.
Well here we are. Not working? How so? A ugly fluid at the bottom. I guess it is wooorking-ish? Fluid larva? or something? GPU programming, trying to make sense of something with absolutely no sense. For the love of bugs. So many things could go wrong. Oh my god, it is crashing every 2 minutes, or 1 sec, or 20 secs. Fuck, GPU data race. I am going to die. Two days struggling with it, not sleeping much. Who cares about sleep anyway? Fcking interoperability OpenGL-OpenCL not plugged correctly due to my bug. Lot of new safetybelts in OpenCL context -> good side of things. 

#### Adjusting to fluids imperatives
Fine no more crash. What's next? A fluid maybe? Cool, time to think and make physical sense of what you see and your parameters. Add more debugging visual. Density as color.
boundary conditions, domain size, time integration, rest density, initial conditions.
Oh yea it is working now. Biutiful. Boundary conditions are not perfect, far from it but it works-ish for now. Explain bug of BC?

#### Working on initial conditions

#### Advanced features
Tensile instability, xsph compressibility. Reducing framerate. Tweaking params to have something decently beautiful.

## Conclusion
Here we are, a PBF working fine.
Packaging installer, tweaking stuff, cleaning and voila! 1.0 is out. 
Project in mind since 2015, 6 years ago! 
Rendering free surfaces, CUDA, smoke, ambient occlusion volumes

and therefore have always been numerically approximated by different means, solving them in polynomial vector spaces,  or else (?)
 in order to not be discouraged by the magnitude of the tasks lying ahead of me. 
3. When facing walls, hitting them again and again until breaching them
aiming high and don't look back
splitting complex challenges in smaller pieces

Maybe Lagrangian solvers can reach the same level of precision than Eulerian ones by using billions of particles, yet their main goal is not necessarily to compete with grid methods but more to complete them. 

